---
layout: post
title: "Metamorphosis of 2022"
categories: thoughts
tags: [writing]
---

## Chronological Marker

People often use the new year as the origin point of new goals, or resolutions that they'd like to accomplish.  Transformations that they'd like to undergo.  Promises to themselves or others that they'd like to keep.  The Earth has evolved around the sun, once again.  And now people take advantage of it, seeing it as an external metric that they can build from.

I always thought that new year resolutions were a farce.  That if someone had the intention of accomplishing a goal or making a change within themselves, then it should happen any time.  They shouldn't wait.  But you know what?  I'm on board with it this time around, but from a more nuanced perspective.

There is a distinct metaphysical change that I can detect within myself and the world when a new year hits.  Is it placebo?  Imagined?  For the purposes of what I want to do, that does not matter.  It feels like a novel beginning, and that's good enough for me.

I've been planning and thinking quite meticulously from the start of this new year.  There is no going back, we must look toward the future, as it's ours for the taking.  It is the not-yet-existent plane of reality in which all of our plans may come to fruition, and the place in which transformation will take place over time with a series of deliberate decisions and efforts.  

We only live once and life is not very long.  Let's take advantage of this and live with no regrets stemming from the perpetual procrastination of our deepest desires and goals.  Why would we do that to ourself?  It is an act of self-love to fight for what you want, to put in the time and effort required to actualization.

And it requires minimizing and focusing.  Honing in on a few select things and areas so you can put all of your effort toward it instead of spreading yourself too thin and becoming scattered, producing nothing of value, overburdened by a list of things that is too vast, too unrealistic, and will leave you feeling unaccomplished.

Here are the structures that will characterize my 2022.

## Creative Projects

I am still in the process of writing my first novel.  And this is the year that I am going to finish the first draft, at the very least.  This is my top priority outside of my career.

The motivation and need for this no longer originates from just wanting to "write a book."  I'm now far too invested in the story and the characters for this goal to make sense.  It has become about needing to tell the tale of Svea and Mikko, two R.E.G. extractors who find themselves on an alien planet, chased by a monstrosity, full of death, uncertainty, and deception.  As I write it, it does not feel like I am creating out of thin air.  It feels like on some level, this story already exists somewhere else.  All I'm going is uncovering it and putting it into words.  And with my words and my story and my characters, I am expressing myself and what I think about life.  I am exploring my own neuroses and some of my deepest questions that have occupied my mind for the majority of my time on Earth.  I am exploring questions of morality.

Side note: What if all works of fictions have existed in some form in some part of the universe in some time period, and we have access to them through a collective consciousness and mode of perception that can grasp past, present, and future in an infinite number of domains of reality?  What if creatives should not be called "creatives," but "people who are capable of translating what has happened or will happen"?

The bottom line is this first draft is going to get finished, and it's going to require very consistent effort for 30-60 minutes per day, every day of the week, even when I do not feel like writing.

Outside of my novel is a manga reader programming project I hope to finish as well.  It's something I will actually use, and I hope other people are able to use it as well.  My vision was a minimalistic and easy to use manga reader complete with a library.  Something nice to add to my portfolio outside of work, and it will let me strengthen my programming and development skills.

## Reading

I have too many books.  Just like I have too many video games.  So, what am I going to do about this?

Create a list and read them.  And more importantly, set aside time each day during a certain part of the day to read, and then make it an ingrained habit.  The end result if this is accomplished: books get read and my backlog shrinks.

Reading is going to help me write.  It's going to familiarize me with writing and get me in the correct mindset.  It's going to expose me to new vocabulary, sentence structures, and methods of telling a story and developing characters.  It's very important, and it's also very fun and fulfilling if you can take the time to engage with it and sink some hours in.

My goal is at least 10 books, mostly fiction with some non-fiction thrown in that focuses on improving in the craft of creative writing and storytelling.

## Elimination of Bad Habits & Distractions in Favor of Deep Work

I've struggled with some bad habits for most of my teenage and adult life.  The worst offender is how I use the internet for distraction, stimulation, and procrastination.  I've gone down far too many rabbit holes of research and internet surfing, letting countless hours pass me by, wasted, never to return.  Hours I could have spent bringing me closer to my goals or simply enjoying life in a peaceful state.  Worst of all, I've stumbled upon some really toxic and destructive things in the process.

I hate that I do this.  I've tried doing everything that I can to overcome it, going to very extreme lengths, sometimes even blocking the entire internet with sophisticated software.  I've made some progress, but somehow, it always rears its ugly head and I begin falling back into the same traps.  And each time this happens, it makes me feel worse, as if I've made zero progress.  It's always all-or-nothing with me.

It's another year, so it's another time that I'm going to try to conquer this once and for all.  I'm not giving up.  I'm not inviting in the status quo to stay.  I've accepted that I may fuck up often, but I know that I'm always going to keep trying, and this year is no exception.

Deep work is in my future.  Long periods of uninterrupted time spent in a flow state where I learn and create.  It's something I am going to be working toward every day, trying the best I can to rewire my brain in the process while I stay away from shallow activities like checking my phone, watching youtube videos, or reading forum comments.

Also, no alcohol.  I'm not letting anything affect my medication treatment, but beyond that, it's hard on both your body and your mind.  I enjoy being sober and taking care of my health.  Besides, alcohol is too trendy and hardly anyone questions its existence or purpose.

## Social

One of the more difficult aspects of my life ever since I got out of college.  Who am I kidding?  It was sometimes difficult in college as well.

I'm very lucky to have a best friend who lives in a nearby city, as well as a few great friends around the country who still keep in touch with me on a semi-regular basis.

I'd like to step out of my comfort zone this year and meet new people.  I've already taken the first step by joining a nearby kickboxing HIIT gym.  Otherwise, I'm going to look into attending meetups for interests like writing and hiking.  My hope is that I meet some friends in my immediate vicinity to occasionally do stuff with, and beyond that, just improve my social skills and identity in relation to other people in general.

## Fitness & Health

As always, I'm continuing with my fitness.  I plan on working out 5x per week, a combination of strength training and HIIT Mon - Fri, and occasionally going on hikes during the weekend.  My plan is to get down to almost single digit bodyfat levels, and then try to comfortably and sustainably maintain that, perhaps 10-11%.

Whole foods diet.  Minimal sugar or processed food.  Keeping a high intake of fat soluble vitamins and Omega 3 through additional supplementation.
